Our product went out of a private beta. It was growing, but slowly and linearly. The company was running out of funding and struggled to raise more money. And I wanted to spend more and more time on my open source projects.
I also wanted to give my first conference talk. Naturally, I wanted to talk about hot reloading, but I knew somebody already mentioned it at ReactConf, and I thought people wouldn’t be excited about it. I decided to add some spice to my talk proposal by adding “with time travel” — again, inspired by Bret’s demo. The proposal got accepted, and for a few months I didn’t think much about it.
In April, my salary got delayed by several weeks. It went through eventually, but I realized it’s time to look for a new job. I found some company using one of my projects, and they agreed to sponsor my work on it for a few months.
My girlfriend asked if I wanted to get married. I said I thought I’d get married late in my 30s. She asked: “Why?” I couldn’t really find any justification for waiting so we soon bought rings and got married. Our wedding has cost us $100.
The deadline for my talk was approaching. But I had no idea how to implement “time travel”. I knew that Elm had something similar, but I was scared to look at it because I worried I’d find out time travel can’t be implemented well in JS.
At the time, there were many Flux libraries. I’ve tried a few of those, notably Flummox by Andrew Clark, and I had a vague sense that making hot reloading work with Flux would also let me implement time travel. Sunil’s gist led me to an idea: a variant of Flux pattern with a reducer function instead of a store. I had a neat name in mind for it already. And I really needed it for my talk!
I implemented Redux just in time for my demo of time travel. My first talk rehearsal was on Skype. I was sweating, mumbling, and running over it too fast. At the end of my rehearsal, I asked the organizer if my talk was any good. He said “well… people like you” which I took as an euphemism for horrible.
I asked a designer friend from the startup I just quit to help make my slides pretty. I added animations and transitions. The more polished my talk looked, the calmer and more confident I felt. I practiced it a dozen times.
I flew to Paris for my first technical conference. This was probably the happiest day of my life. For the first time, I put faces next to avatars. There were UI nerds and my personal heroes around me. It felt like going to Hogwarts.
My talk almost didn’t happen. In the morning, I found that my laptop refused to connect to the projector. I only had a few hours left. Christopher Chedeau was kind enough to lend me his laptop, and I transferred my live demo setup to his computer (except for the Sublime license, as you may know if you watched it).
At first, my demo didn’t run on Christopher’s laptop because we had different Node versions. The conference WiFi was so bad that downloading another Node version was a non-starter. Luckily, I found an npm command that rebuilds the binaries. It saved my demo. I gave my talk with his computer, and it went well.
I met many people in the audience who I already knew from Twitter. One of them was Jing Chen. I remembered her from our IRC chat on the React channel, and came to say hi. She asked whether FB recruiters contacted me before, and I said I couldn’t get a US visa. Jing asked whether I’m interested in working at the London office, and I had no idea there even was a London office! I called my wife and asked if she’s up for moving to London. I thought she’d hate the idea, but she immediately said yes. So I said yes to an interview.
There were four people from FB at the conference, so Jing arranged a full interview right at the conference hotel. It was a regular interview process, except it was in Paris and everyone was sweaty because it was so hot outside. 
Everything happened so spontaneously that I neither had time to prepare, nor to get nervous. At one point I freaked out and panicked because I couldn’t write three lines of code that swap two items in an array. I asked Jing to look away for a few seconds. She said “I know you can swap two items”, and that gave me the confidence to finish the answer and make it through the interview. I probably didn’t pass with flying colors, but I got the offer.
My talk got really popular. Andrew Clark has already deprecated Flummox — the most popular Flux library — in favor of Redux, which he co-wrote with me. People started putting Redux in production. New learners were confused by the README, which was written for early adopters who had all the existing context. I didn’t have a job, and it would take me several more months to get a UK visa.
I started a Patreon to sustain my projects for a few months — and specifically to write Redux documentation, create small example apps, and record some free videos about it. I raised about $5k/month on Patreon which was more than any salary I made by that point in my life. Folks from Egghead sent me some mic gear, and I recorded my “Getting Started with Redux” course. I can’t watch it without cringing today, but it has been very popular and made me good money (around $3k/month in royalties) for quite a while — even though it was free.
FB took care of handling most of the immigration process. My wife and I only had to fill some papers, and I had to take an English exam and do some health checks. FB did most of the work to relocate us, including moving our cat from Russia to UK (which cost around $5k). I was hired at engineering level 4, with initial base salary of $100k/year and an initial restricted stock unit grant of $125k vesting over four years. I also had a signing bonus of $18k which helped a lot as we were settling in. (By the way, tech salaries are lower in UK than in US.)
We arrived to London at the end of November 2015. We’ve never been to London before. We took a black cab from the airport. We couldn’t figure out how to turn off the heating in the cab for ten minutes so we got very sweaty and couldn’t see anything through the window. When we turned off the fan and the window cleared up, our eyes were wide like saucers. London was beautiful.
The next day, Roman Mazurenko got hit to death by a careless driver. He just got his US visa approved, and he came to Moscow to pick up his documents. He once told me that there’s something devilish about Moscow. It doesn’t just let you go. I would not see my friend again. Not in 2015, not ever.
Roman has had a sort of a digital afterlife, courtesy of his friends. I know for a fact he would’ve loved the irony of having a two point five star App Store rating.
2016
New job. New city. New country. Different language. Unfamiliar accent. Big company. Orientation. Meeting rooms. Projects. Teams. Documents. Forms. Shit. Fuck. Fuck. Fuckety Fuck, Shit, Oh Dear, Blimey!
I barely remember the first few months. I was in a constant state of stress from trying to understand what people are saying without subtitles. What the hell is my manager telling me? Is it rude to ask to repeat again? Spell it for me?
What, I need to call a lady in Scotland to get a national insurance number by phone? I don’t get a word she’s saying. What even is the national insurance? Why do I have a “zero” tax code and why is my salary less than I expected? Wait, people actually pay taxes here? What do I do when I’m sick? What’s NHS?
During my first trip to US in 2016 (part of onboarding), I forgot to eat the whole day, drank a lot of coffee, and had a full-fledged panic attack trying to explain how hot reloading works to a colleague. We called an ambulance, and I got a $800 bill (thankfully, paid by FB — or at least I don’t recall paying it myself).
Relocation was nerve-wracking even though the company handled most of the difficulties. I thought I did everything in the onboarding instructions, but I forgot to register with the police. (I confused this with registering at the post office, which we also had to do.) I only found out that we screwed up months later, and we were told it might affect our visas. Luckily, it didn’t so far.
Originally, I was supposed to join the React Native team in London. Usually, we hire people to go through Bootcamp and pick a team, but I didn’t have that freedom. I was preallocated. However, I wasn’t very excited about React Native in particular. I talked to Tom Occhino (he managed the React team at that time), and he suggested that I can join the React Core team (based in US) as the only UK member. I was already used to remote work from open source, so I agreed.
In 2016, there was a React boom, but everybody made their own “boilerplate” with a bundler, watcher, compiler, and so on. React became synonymous with modular JavaScript, ES6, and all the tooling complexity. Christopher Chedeau suggested to prototype a command-line interface for getting started with React. We made the first version in a few weeks and released Create React App.
2017
Egghead courses continued to bring steady side income with royalties. I didn’t think twice before spending them on food delivery or nice clothes.
It’s only in 2017 that I came to realize that these royalties are taxable as foreign income, and that I owe Her Majesty something like $30k. Oops. Like an adult, I got an accountant. Fixing this mess depleted all my savings again.
At work, we spent most of 2017 rewriting React from scratch. You know the result of it as React 16. Sophie tells the story of how we did it here.
Aside from taxes, there wasn’t a lot happening in my personal life. I was still settling in. I got less shy dealing with bureaucracies. I could make and take phone calls without freaking out. I watched movies without subtitles. I learned how to deal with NHS and with private insurance. I stopped doing side projects.
2018–2019
The last two years have been a blur. I’m still too close to them to have a clear perspective on what was important.
Professionally, our projects are as demanding as ever. If you follow React, you know about some things we have been working on. I’ve grown as an engineer, and still have much to learn. Our London team has grown — I’m not alone now.
People occasionally recognize me. This is humbling. Someone once recognized me in a sauna and started complaining about React. Please don’t be that person.
I got promoted. I started this blog as a side project. I have another side project coming, which I’ve been musing about for the better part of these two years. I met more people from the internet and put more faces to avatars. This is fun.
I always knew that I liked building UIs. I got hooked on Visual Basic. I spent this decade building UIs, and then building a way to build UIs. And then talking about it and explaining it. But I realize now that my drive to explain things is just as important to me as my drive to build. Perhaps, even more important.
I look forward to doing more of that in the next decade.
Or, should I say, this decade?
Welcome to the twenties.